In this part of our symposium,
we are addressing why and how
to help our Bible students
overcome unclean habits.
Now, first of all,
why overcome unclean habits?
As teachers, we need to reach the heart
of those we study with,
to understand that the God we worship
expects this to stop.
Let me show you a verse
that you’re familiar with,
many of you, in Peter’s letter
—1 Peter chapter one.
And we could use these thoughts here
to endeavor to reach the heart
of those who we’re studying with,
why this unclean habit must stop.
Let’s read verses 14 through 16:
“As obedient children, stop being molded
“by the desires
you formerly had in your ignorance,
“but like the Holy One who called you,
“become holy yourselves in all your conduct,
“for it is written:
‘You must be holy,
because I am holy.’”
So it’s very clear here.
There are things
that our Bible studies practiced before
—these unclean habits in their ignorance,
before they knew Jehovah,
before they knew his requirements.
They need to understand he is the Holy One,
and they have to have their conduct line up
with the Holy One that we worship.
And this is not a suggestion,
as quoting the scripture
here in verse 16, it’s a must.
They must be holy because Jehovah is holy.
Now in the following dramatization,
note how Neeta helps her Bible student
to overcome an unclean habit.
Neeta and I talked about it.
Part of me felt a bit scared,
part a bit crazy.
Me knocking on doors?
But I knew
this was the right thing to do.
‘A minister should also be free
‘from all nonmedical use of addictive
or mind-altering substances.’
Nonmedical?
But taking something
when I’m feeling a little stressed,
like maybe, I don’t know, a little weed
—that’s OK, right?
And it’s for the stress.
I guess I didn’t quite understand
what “medical” meant.
So will we see you during the week?
Yeah.
Thank you, Jade.
We’ll be back.
You can guess what
our next few studies were about.
“And you should continue
to be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
Knowing it was wrong was easy.
Figuring out how to cope
without it wasn’t.
Beating it
felt impossible.
Being free of it
to serve Jehovah
felt amazing!
Next, let’s discuss the “how to help.”
We see how our Sister Neeta
endeavored to help her Bible student
when she became aware of that unclean habit.
But there are some nice thoughts
as to how to help our Bible students
overcome unclean habits.
Now, we want to be candid
and clear from the Scriptures,
but always remember,
we need to be warm
and we need to be tactful with them.
These habits have a grip on them,
and we need to display
not a judgmental attitude but patience
and, really, just imitating Jehovah,
helping them to apply Bible counsel.
Now, it’s important for the teacher
to understand what we’re going to share
with you next,
and then, if you have it clear,
you’re going to be able
to impart it to your Bible student.
Let’s read a familiar scripture
in Ephesians chapter 4.
And it’s important to understand
what we read here
as related to helping them
overcome unclean habits
that go contrary to Bible principles.
Now notice in Ephesians chapter 4,
verses 22, 23, and 24:
“You were taught
to put away the old personality
“that conforms
to your former course of conduct
“and that is being corrupted
according to its [that’s the old personality]
“deceptive desires.
“And you should continue to be made new
“in your dominant mental attitude,
“and should put on the new personality
“that was created according to God’s will
in true righteousness and loyalty.”
So we have to understand this clearly,
and then we need to teach our students.
There’s the old personality.
Those of us that came in the truth
had old personalities.
We know exactly what Paul
is writing to the Ephesians about
—and that’s a former course of conduct
that is no longer acceptable.
But the key to being able
to put on the new personality
and put away the old one
is found in verse 23:
“Be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
So, what does that mean?
That means your
Bible students’ thinking
has to change.
The thinking has to change
into this new personality
—thinking that’s guided and directed
by Jehovah and his Word.
Now to illustrate what I mean by that,
I’ll tell you a personal experience
with a Bible study that I had many years ago,
and I really appreciated
how Jehovah helped him.
Now, when I studied with him, he was 70,
early 70’s, and he had smoked cigarettes
since he was eight years old.
That’s phenomenal.
I smoked before I became
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But decades?
No.
So smoking had a grip on him,
that old personality,
and that was very discouraging
and difficult for him.
However, he was making progress,
coming to meetings.
And this one example
that happened with his life
will illustrate the point we’re making here.
So I’m working in a department
there at the convention,
and it’s near the lobby area.
And I notice my Bible study head out,
and the program is ongoing.
He heads out the door.
And out of personal interest
(not to police him)
I went to go see; is he OK?
So he’s about a block down
from the lobby of the convention center,
and you know what?
Smoking a cigarette.
So he notices me come up behind him,
and it just hits him, and he’s contrite.
The shame is all in his face,
and he throws that cigarette down
and stomps it with his shoe.
So when I get close to him, he says:
“I just— I’ve been asking Jehovah,
‘Forgive me; forgive me.’
When this happens,
I always ask him to forgive me.”
And I said: “Well, that’s commendable.
“That’s so important.
I know you love Jehovah.
“However, here’s what you need to learn.
“See, you need to approach Jehovah before,
“and supplicate him
before you take that cigarette.”
And that’s where
our Bible students need help.
It’s important that they
have to supplicate Jehovah
before that unclean habit overwhelms them.
And I’m happy to say he did.
He turned his back on that.
He supplicated Jehovah.
And boy, imagine smoking all those decades,
and he died a faithful servant
of Jehovah God.
So help your Bible students.
And keep that in mind;
they have to change their thinking,
and it’s our responsibility
to make that clear to them.
Now, teach them too
by means of practical assistance.
Be a dear friend for them;
stay there for them.
Be available when they need help
with something, and just love them.
Don’t be judgmental.
Be supportive, and help them
to overcome these unclean habits.
And very important,
teach them,
“‘Do not give up.’
Jehovah loves you.
“He wants you to rejoice
in the progress you’re making.
He loves you.”
And what you’ll experience
when they become a dedicated Witness,
your fellow servant of God,
you will have a friend forever.
Now, next on our symposium, the final talk,
Brother Geoffrey Jackson,
a member of the Governing Body,
is going to consider the talk
“Help Your Bible Students to Develop
a Personal Relationship With Jehovah.”